doc/book/table-gateway.md, before:

# Table Gateways

The Table Gateway subcomponent provides an object-oriented representation of a
datbase table; its methods mirror the most common table operations. In code,
the interface resembles:

```php
namespace Zend\Db\TableGateway;

use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSetInterface;
use Zend\Db\Sql\Where;

interface TableGatewayInterface
{
    public function getTable() : string;
    public function select(Where|callable|string|array $where = null) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function insert(array $set) : int;
    public function update(
        array $set,
        Where|callable|string|array $where = null,
        array $joins = null
    ) : int;
    public function delete(Where|callable|string|array $where) : int;
}
```

There are two primary implementations of the `TableGatewayInterface`,
`AbstractTableGateway` and `TableGateway`. The `AbstractTableGateway` is an
abstract basic implementation that provides functionality for `select()`,
`insert()`, `update()`, `delete()`, as well as an additional API for doing
these same kinds of tasks with explicit `Zend\Db\Sql` objects: `selectWith()`,
`insertWith()`, `updateWith()`, and `deleteWith()`. In addition,
AbstractTableGateway also implements a "Feature" API, that allows for expanding
the behaviors of the base `TableGateway` implementation without having to
extend the class with this new functionality.  The `TableGateway` concrete
implementation simply adds a sensible constructor to the `AbstractTableGateway`
class so that out-of-the-box, `TableGateway` does not need to be extended in
order to be consumed and utilized to its fullest.

## Quick start

The following example uses `Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway`, which defines
the following API:

```php
namespace Zend\Db\TableGateway;

use Zend\Db\Adapter\AdapterInterface;
use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSet;
use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSetInterface;
use Zend\Db\Sql;
use Zend\Db\Sql\TableIdentifier;

class TableGateway extends AbstractTableGateway
{
    public $lastInsertValue;
    public $table;
    public $adapter;

    public function __construct(
        string|TableIdentifier $table,
        AdapterInterface $adapter,
        Feature\AbstractFeature|Feature\FeatureSet|Feature\AbstractFeature[] $features = null,
        ResultSetInterface $resultSetPrototype = null,
        Sql\Sql $sql = null
    );

    /** Inherited from AbstractTableGateway */

    public function isInitialized() : bool;
    public function initialize() : void;
    public function getTable() : string;
    public function getAdapter() : AdapterInterface;
    public function getColumns() : array;
    public function getFeatureSet() Feature\FeatureSet;
    public function getResultSetPrototype() : ResultSetInterface;
    public function getSql() | Sql\Sql;
    public function select(Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where = null) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function selectWith(Sql\Select $select) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function insert(array $set) : int;
    public function insertWith(Sql\Insert $insert) | int;
    public function update(
        array $set,
        Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where = null,
        array $joins = null
    ) : int;
    public function updateWith(Sql\Update $update) : int;
    public function delete(Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where) : int;
    public function deleteWith(Sql\Delete $delete) : int;
    public function getLastInsertValue() : int;
}
```

The concrete `TableGateway` object uses constructor injection for getting
dependencies and options into the instance. The table name and an instance of
an `Adapter` are all that is required to create an instance.

Out of the box, this implementation makes no assumptions about table structure
or metadata, and when `select()` is executed, a simple `ResultSet` object with
the populated `Adapter`'s `Result` (the datasource) will be returned and ready
for iteration.

```php
use Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway;

$projectTable = new TableGateway('project', $adapter);
$rowset = $projectTable->select(['type' => 'PHP']);

echo 'Projects of type PHP: ' . PHP_EOL;
foreach ($rowset as $projectRow) {
    echo $projectRow['name'] . PHP_EOL;
}

// Or, when expecting a single row:
$artistTable = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter);
$rowset      = $artistTable->select(['id' => 2]);
$artistRow   = $rowset->current();

var_dump($artistRow);
```

The `select()` method takes the same arguments as
`Zend\Db\Sql\Select::where()`; arguments will be passed to the `Select`
instance used to build the SELECT query. This means the following is possible:

```php
use Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway;
use Zend\Db\Sql\Select;

$artistTable = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter);

// Search for at most 2 artists who's name starts with Brit, ascending:
$rowset = $artistTable->select(function (Select $select) {
    $select->where->like('name', 'Brit%');
    $select->order('name ASC')->limit(2);
});
```

## TableGateway Features

The Features API allows for extending the functionality of the base
`TableGateway` object without having to polymorphically extend the base class.
This allows for a wider array of possible mixing and matching of features to
achieve a particular behavior that needs to be attained to make the base
implementation of `TableGateway` useful for a particular problem.

With the `TableGateway` object, features should be injected though the
constructor. The constructor can take features in 3 different forms:

- as a single `Feature` instance
- as a `FeatureSet` instance
- as an array of `Feature` instances

There are a number of features built-in and shipped with zend-db:

- `GlobalAdapterFeature`: the ability to use a global/static adapter without
  needing to inject it into a `TableGateway` instance. This is only useful when
  you are extending the `AbstractTableGateway` implementation:

    ```php
    use Zend\Db\TableGateway\AbstractTableGateway;
    use Zend\Db\TableGateway\Feature;
    
    class MyTableGateway extends AbstractTableGateway
    {
        public function __construct()
        {
            $this->table      = 'my_table';
            $this->featureSet = new Feature\FeatureSet();
            $this->featureSet->addFeature(new Feature\GlobalAdapterFeature());
            $this->initialize();
        }
    }
    
    // elsewhere in code, in a bootstrap
    Zend\Db\TableGateway\Feature\GlobalAdapterFeature::setStaticAdapter($adapter);
    
    // in a controller, or model somewhere
    $table = new MyTableGateway(); // adapter is statically loaded
    ```

- `MasterSlaveFeature`: the ability to use a master adapter for `insert()`,
  `update()`, and `delete()`, but switch to a slave adapter for all `select()`
  operations.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\MasterSlaveFeature($slaveAdapter));
    ```

- `MetadataFeature`: the ability populate `TableGateway` with column
  information from a `Metadata` object. It will also store the primary key
  information in case the `RowGatewayFeature` needs to consume this information.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\MetadataFeature());
    ```

- `EventFeature`: the ability to compose a
  [zend-eventmanager](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-eventmanager)
  `EventManager` instance within your `TableGateway` instance, and attach
  listeners to the various events of its lifecycle.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\EventFeature($eventManagerInstance));
    ```

- `RowGatewayFeature`: the ability for `select()` to return a `ResultSet` object that upon iteration
  will return a `RowGateway` instance for each row.

    ```php
    $table   = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\RowGatewayFeature('id'));
    $results = $table->select(['id' => 2]);
    
    $artistRow       = $results->current();
    $artistRow->name = 'New Name';
    $artistRow->save();
    ```
- `SequenceFeature`: the ability to integrate with Oracle, PostgreSQL, 
  (TODO: and SqlServer 2016) sequence objects. Sequences are used for generating sequential integers.
  These are usually used for automatically generating Primary Key IDs (similar to MySQL's
  `AUTO_INCREMENT` but without performance penalties), or ensuring uniqueness of entity IDs
  across multiple tables following some business rule (for example, unique invoice numbers across
  multiple order systems).  Sequence objects are 
  exclusively used for incrementing an integer and are not tied to table values. Therefore, they
  need to be created manually prior to inserting data into tables requiring PKs and `UNIQUE` columns
  using DDL 
   ```sql
     CREATE SEQUENCE album_id;
    ``` 
  
  Sequence's `NEXTVAL` SQL construct can be used either as a default value for a column specified in
  table's `CREATE` DDL, 
  or ran manually at every `insert` operation to have next available integer captured and inserted 
  in a table along with the rest of the values.
  
  Unless need to guarantee uniqueness across all tables, thus calling `sequence_name.nextval` on every `insert`
  query across entire codebase, usually a separate sequence is created per table. Every `insert`
  statement would have `album_id.nextval`, `artist_id.nextval` etc. as one of the values along with
  the actual data.
  
  To be able to do these operations at the DB abstraction level, `TableGateway` needs to be informed 
  what columns should be managed by what sequence.
  
  If developer chooses to manually create a sequence for each table's autoincremented column (in Oracle 
  prior to *12c* this was the only way), then the name of sequence responsible for particular table
  would known and can be applied to `TableGateway` right away.
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\SequenceFeature('id', 'artist_id_sequence'));
  
    $table->insert(['name'] => 'New Name';
    $nextId = $table->nextSequenceId('id');
    $lastInsertId = $table->lastSequenceId('id');
  ```
  
  However, PostgreSQL (TODO: and Oracle since *12c*) allows automatic creation of sequences during `CREATE TABLE`
  or `ALTER TABLE` operation by specifying column type `SERIAL`:
  
  ```sql
    CREATE TABLE artist 
    {
      id SERIAL,
      name CHARACTER VARYING (30)
    };
  ````
  
  Or using Zend's `Db\Sql\DDL`
  
  ```php
    $table = new CreateTable('artist');
    
    $idColumn = new Serial('id');
    $nameColumn = new Char('name');
  
    $table->addColumn($idColumn);
    $table->addColumn($nameColumn);
  ```
  
  In this case, sequence is created automatically. `TableGateway` still has to be aware of what column
  is getting autoincrement treatment but without knowing exactly what the sequence name is, second parameter
  should be left blank:
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist' $adapter, new Feature\SequenceFeature('id');
  ```
  
  With second parameter left null, `TableGateway` will generate sequence name based on same rule
  PostgreSQL uses (*tablename_columnname_seq* but if the resultant name is determined to be greater than 
  63 characters, an additional query will be made to database schema to find what PostgreSQL has created 
  instead, since transaction rules are more complex.
  
  This is important to know if you have long table and column names, and do not want
  to run an extra metadata query on every `TableGateway` object construction. If that is the case,
  take note of what PostgreSQL created using
  ```sql
    SELECT 'column_default'
    FROM information_schema.columns 
    WHERE table_schema = 'public'
      AND table_name = 'artist'
      AND column_name = 'id'
      AND column_default LIKE 'nextval%';
  ```
  
  take note of what `nextval` is reading from, and add it to `SequenceFeature` constructor.
  
  There could be complex business rules needing multiple sequences in a table. `TableGateway` can have
  multiple sequences added in an array:
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('wholesales', $adapter, [
      new Feature\Sequence('id', 'sale_id_sequence'),
      new Feature\Sequence('invoice_id', 'invoice_id_sequence)'
    ]);
  ```
  
  Then calls to `$table->lastSequenceId('invoice_id')` will find the appropriate sequence instance to
  get ID from.

Commit message:

#186 #165 truncate based on length. If longer than 63 bytes for postgresql, query the actual name.

doc/book/table-gateway.md, after:

# Table Gateways

The Table Gateway subcomponent provides an object-oriented representation of a
datbase table; its methods mirror the most common table operations. In code,
the interface resembles:

```php
namespace Zend\Db\TableGateway;

use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSetInterface;
use Zend\Db\Sql\Where;

interface TableGatewayInterface
{
    public function getTable() : string;
    public function select(Where|callable|string|array $where = null) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function insert(array $set) : int;
    public function update(
        array $set,
        Where|callable|string|array $where = null,
        array $joins = null
    ) : int;
    public function delete(Where|callable|string|array $where) : int;
}
```

There are two primary implementations of the `TableGatewayInterface`,
`AbstractTableGateway` and `TableGateway`. The `AbstractTableGateway` is an
abstract basic implementation that provides functionality for `select()`,
`insert()`, `update()`, `delete()`, as well as an additional API for doing
these same kinds of tasks with explicit `Zend\Db\Sql` objects: `selectWith()`,
`insertWith()`, `updateWith()`, and `deleteWith()`. In addition,
AbstractTableGateway also implements a "Feature" API, that allows for expanding
the behaviors of the base `TableGateway` implementation without having to
extend the class with this new functionality.  The `TableGateway` concrete
implementation simply adds a sensible constructor to the `AbstractTableGateway`
class so that out-of-the-box, `TableGateway` does not need to be extended in
order to be consumed and utilized to its fullest.

## Quick start

The following example uses `Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway`, which defines
the following API:

```php
namespace Zend\Db\TableGateway;

use Zend\Db\Adapter\AdapterInterface;
use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSet;
use Zend\Db\ResultSet\ResultSetInterface;
use Zend\Db\Sql;
use Zend\Db\Sql\TableIdentifier;

class TableGateway extends AbstractTableGateway
{
    public $lastInsertValue;
    public $table;
    public $adapter;

    public function __construct(
        string|TableIdentifier $table,
        AdapterInterface $adapter,
        Feature\AbstractFeature|Feature\FeatureSet|Feature\AbstractFeature[] $features = null,
        ResultSetInterface $resultSetPrototype = null,
        Sql\Sql $sql = null
    );

    /** Inherited from AbstractTableGateway */

    public function isInitialized() : bool;
    public function initialize() : void;
    public function getTable() : string;
    public function getAdapter() : AdapterInterface;
    public function getColumns() : array;
    public function getFeatureSet() Feature\FeatureSet;
    public function getResultSetPrototype() : ResultSetInterface;
    public function getSql() | Sql\Sql;
    public function select(Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where = null) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function selectWith(Sql\Select $select) : ResultSetInterface;
    public function insert(array $set) : int;
    public function insertWith(Sql\Insert $insert) | int;
    public function update(
        array $set,
        Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where = null,
        array $joins = null
    ) : int;
    public function updateWith(Sql\Update $update) : int;
    public function delete(Sql\Where|callable|string|array $where) : int;
    public function deleteWith(Sql\Delete $delete) : int;
    public function getLastInsertValue() : int;
}
```

The concrete `TableGateway` object uses constructor injection for getting
dependencies and options into the instance. The table name and an instance of
an `Adapter` are all that is required to create an instance.

Out of the box, this implementation makes no assumptions about table structure
or metadata, and when `select()` is executed, a simple `ResultSet` object with
the populated `Adapter`'s `Result` (the datasource) will be returned and ready
for iteration.

```php
use Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway;

$projectTable = new TableGateway('project', $adapter);
$rowset = $projectTable->select(['type' => 'PHP']);

echo 'Projects of type PHP: ' . PHP_EOL;
foreach ($rowset as $projectRow) {
    echo $projectRow['name'] . PHP_EOL;
}

// Or, when expecting a single row:
$artistTable = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter);
$rowset      = $artistTable->select(['id' => 2]);
$artistRow   = $rowset->current();

var_dump($artistRow);
```

The `select()` method takes the same arguments as
`Zend\Db\Sql\Select::where()`; arguments will be passed to the `Select`
instance used to build the SELECT query. This means the following is possible:

```php
use Zend\Db\TableGateway\TableGateway;
use Zend\Db\Sql\Select;

$artistTable = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter);

// Search for at most 2 artists who's name starts with Brit, ascending:
$rowset = $artistTable->select(function (Select $select) {
    $select->where->like('name', 'Brit%');
    $select->order('name ASC')->limit(2);
});
```

## TableGateway Features

The Features API allows for extending the functionality of the base
`TableGateway` object without having to polymorphically extend the base class.
This allows for a wider array of possible mixing and matching of features to
achieve a particular behavior that needs to be attained to make the base
implementation of `TableGateway` useful for a particular problem.

With the `TableGateway` object, features should be injected though the
constructor. The constructor can take features in 3 different forms:

- as a single `Feature` instance
- as a `FeatureSet` instance
- as an array of `Feature` instances

There are a number of features built-in and shipped with zend-db:

- `GlobalAdapterFeature`: the ability to use a global/static adapter without
  needing to inject it into a `TableGateway` instance. This is only useful when
  you are extending the `AbstractTableGateway` implementation:

    ```php
    use Zend\Db\TableGateway\AbstractTableGateway;
    use Zend\Db\TableGateway\Feature;
    
    class MyTableGateway extends AbstractTableGateway
    {
        public function __construct()
        {
            $this->table      = 'my_table';
            $this->featureSet = new Feature\FeatureSet();
            $this->featureSet->addFeature(new Feature\GlobalAdapterFeature());
            $this->initialize();
        }
    }
    
    // elsewhere in code, in a bootstrap
    Zend\Db\TableGateway\Feature\GlobalAdapterFeature::setStaticAdapter($adapter);
    
    // in a controller, or model somewhere
    $table = new MyTableGateway(); // adapter is statically loaded
    ```

- `MasterSlaveFeature`: the ability to use a master adapter for `insert()`,
  `update()`, and `delete()`, but switch to a slave adapter for all `select()`
  operations.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\MasterSlaveFeature($slaveAdapter));
    ```

- `MetadataFeature`: the ability populate `TableGateway` with column
  information from a `Metadata` object. It will also store the primary key
  information in case the `RowGatewayFeature` needs to consume this information.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\MetadataFeature());
    ```

- `EventFeature`: the ability to compose a
  [zend-eventmanager](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-eventmanager)
  `EventManager` instance within your `TableGateway` instance, and attach
  listeners to the various events of its lifecycle.

    ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\EventFeature($eventManagerInstance));
    ```

- `RowGatewayFeature`: the ability for `select()` to return a `ResultSet` object that upon iteration
  will return a `RowGateway` instance for each row.

    ```php
    $table   = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\RowGatewayFeature('id'));
    $results = $table->select(['id' => 2]);
    
    $artistRow       = $results->current();
    $artistRow->name = 'New Name';
    $artistRow->save();
    ```
- `SequenceFeature`: the ability to integrate with Oracle, PostgreSQL, 
  (TODO: and SqlServer 2016) sequence objects. Sequences are used for generating sequential integers.
  These are usually used for automatically generating Primary Key IDs (similar to MySQL's
  `AUTO_INCREMENT` but without performance penalties), or ensuring uniqueness of entity IDs
  across multiple tables following some business rule (for example, unique invoice numbers across
  multiple order systems).  Sequence objects are 
  exclusively used for incrementing an integer and are not tied to table values. Therefore, they
  need to be created manually prior to inserting data into tables requiring PKs and `UNIQUE` columns
  using DDL 
   ```sql
     CREATE SEQUENCE album_id;
    ``` 
  
  Sequence's `NEXTVAL` SQL construct can be used either as a default value for a column specified in
  table's `CREATE` DDL, 
  or ran manually at every `insert` operation to have next available integer captured and inserted 
  in a table along with the rest of the values.
  
  Unless need to guarantee uniqueness across all tables, thus calling `sequence_name.nextval` on every `insert`
  query across entire codebase, usually a separate sequence is created per table. Every `insert`
  statement would have `album_id.nextval`, `artist_id.nextval` etc. as one of the values along with
  the actual data.
  
  To be able to do these operations at the DB abstraction level, `TableGateway` needs to be informed 
  what columns should be managed by what sequence.
  
  If developer chooses to manually create a sequence for each table's autoincremented column (in Oracle 
  prior to *12c* this was the only way), then the name of sequence responsible for particular table
  would known and can be applied to `TableGateway` right away.
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist', $adapter, new Feature\SequenceFeature('id', 'artist_id_sequence'));
  
    $table->insert(['name'] => 'New Name';
    $nextId = $table->nextSequenceId('id');
    $lastInsertId = $table->lastSequenceId('id');
  ```
  
  However, PostgreSQL (TODO: and Oracle since *12c*) allows automatic creation of sequences during `CREATE TABLE`
  or `ALTER TABLE` operation by specifying column type `SERIAL`:
  
  ```sql
    CREATE TABLE artist 
    {
      id SERIAL,
      name CHARACTER VARYING (30)
    };
  ````
  
  Or using Zend's `Db\Sql\DDL`
  
  ```php
    $table = new CreateTable('artist');
    
    $idColumn = new Serial('id');
    $nameColumn = new Char('name');
  
    $table->addColumn($idColumn);
    $table->addColumn($nameColumn);
  ```
  
  In this case, sequence is created automatically. `TableGateway` still has to be aware of what column
  is getting autoincrement treatment but without knowing exactly what the sequence name is, second parameter
  should be left blank:
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('artist' $adapter, new Feature\SequenceFeature('id');
  ```
  
  With second parameter left null, `TableGateway` will generate sequence name based on same rule
  PostgreSQL uses (*tablename_columnname_seq* but if the resultant name is determined to be greater than 
  63 bytes, an additional query will be made to database schema to find what PostgreSQL has created 
  instead, since transaction rules are more complex.
  
  This is important to know if you have long table and column names, and do not want
  to run an extra metadata query on every `TableGateway` object construction. If that is the case,
  take note of what PostgreSQL created using
  ```sql
    pg_get_serial_sequence('artist', 'id');
  ```
  
  take note of what `nextval` is reading from, and add it to `SequenceFeature` constructor.
  
  There could be complex business rules needing multiple sequences in a table. `TableGateway` can have
  multiple sequences added in an array:
  
  ```php
    $table = new TableGateway('wholesales', $adapter, [
      new Feature\Sequence('id', 'sale_id_sequence'),
      new Feature\Sequence('invoice_id', 'invoice_id_sequence)'
    ]);
  ```
  
  Then calls to `$table->lastSequenceId('invoice_id')` will find the appropriate sequence instance to
  get ID from.
